# Difference between pattern languages and generative sequences

Pattern language = list of key centers contributing some essential quality to the system and list of relationships.

Patterns languages cannot be "constructed" and must be generated by a differentiating step by step process.


Note that the pattern language itself is a tool to plan and predict where to go but it doesn't tell the system's builder where to start. Together with 15 geometrical properties defined by Alexander, it can only be used as tool to validate good choice were made a posteriori

Patterns vs sequences

pattern = map of spatial relationships
sequence = map of pattern temporal relationships


# GENERATE A PATTERN LANGUAGE 

Patterns language can be generated by this step by step sequence.


## WHOLENESS OBSERVATION/PERCEPTION
Observe and feel the wholeness of system. Particular important to feel the latent centers "what wants to emerge ?"

## CREATIVE MOOD SETTING
Get people in a mood governed by feeling not reason/head
Create a space/time so people can share their dreams.

## STORY COLLECTION
Collect stories to get a verbal picture
this is poetic vision, not a sociological survey

## PATTERN LANGUAGE SKETCH 
intuitive amalgation of people's dream to build a draft pattern language
list of patterns = essential elements
draft will be refined by further discussions

## LANGUAGE COMPLETENESS
Use the 7 principes below to create a complete pattern language

### 1 RELATIONSHIPS
defines possible configurations the language generates

### 2 (SPATIAL) ENTITIES
langauge containe or defines several entities, the relationships are defined among these entities.

### 3 RELIABILITY
relationships are reliable and true, not arbitrary

### 4 CONSISTENCY
Consistency between patterns to generate real physical configurations

### 5 INCONSISTENCY
sometimes refreshing and life giving, generates vigor and opens new ideas (PROBLEM IS THE SOLUTION)

### 6 COMPLETENESS
System of patterns is complete if it contains sufficient relationships to allow well formed configuration to be built.

### 7 COHERENCE
The relationships among patterns tend most of the time to generate easily graspable geometrical configurations.


# GENERATIVE SEQUENCE GENERATION

## GENERATIVE SEQUENCE
Ideally the geometrical configuration can be constructed by following certain sequential procedure that will always lead to a coherent configuration in a small number of steps. Generative sequence itself cannot be "constructed" and must be generated.

## ITERATIVE STEPS
Work step by step to reduce the number of variables you have to deal with for decision at any step. Steps allow for evaluation times.

## EVALUATION

At each step evaluate the result. Does it add new centers ? Does it increase the strenght of the centers ? Check against your pattern language and the 15 geometrical properties. 
Check for mistakes
mistake (error) = miss + take = forgot to take something into account.

If there is smething you missed go back to previous step.

## NO IMAGES
Avoid the use of images and draing and instead work with prototypes and mock ups so that people are not trapped in the details of the image but rather in the mainframe at each steps.

# LIVING ARCHITECTURE CONSTRUCTION

This sequence is based on the work done by Christopher Alexander on the Eishin Campus in Japan and documented in his book the battle for the life and beauty of the earth.

## 0 (AGREEMENT)
Make sure user understand fully the process and where it will take them. Particularly important is the fact, not everything will be possible, the path might appear blur at first but will clarify all the way, no plans will be made/used (better to focus on flexible mental images) but design on the ground and using prototypes will be used instead.

## 1 USERS MICROCOSM

Identify users from the various stakeholder groups so as to form a small group who will work regularly on the project. This microcosm should be chosen (or better volunteered) to represent the wider macrocosm of users.

## 2 DREAMS
Make people Dream and share their dreams using interview or better powerful question such as remember the future.

Asking people to share their dreams bring sthem in intuitive mode, in touch with their feeling the quality of the output is much better and more powerful than anything the intellect can provide.

Ex "I remember walking near a place with water and trees where I could tink quietly about my courses..."

## 3 DRAFT PATTERN LANGUAGE

Build a dream pattern language by grouping together elements and decribing relationships between them. The language is a rough map of a system of centers.

## 4 LANGUAGE COMPLETENESS

Check the pattern language using the 7 principles for completeness:
- relationships
- spatial
- reliability
- consistency
- inconsistency
- completeness
- coherence

## 5 USERS VALIDATION

after listing all the essential centers and their relationships, validate with users (or a selected sub group, comittee, that represent all the users). Have them discuss and adjust, then validate the pattern language before proceeding further

## 6 RESSOURCES FIT
Fit and adjust the pattern language to available ressources. If a center is  too costly to be made, try to make it smaller such as to keep the spirit/intent/function but in a feasible way.

In Eishing Alexander matched estimated cost for indoor and outdoor for the wanted surface with the available budget and reduce surface areas by certain percentage so as to keep all the pattern but in a smaller way. Not all the surface were reduced equaly and it was on done on a per-structure basis. The best way to do this is present the constraint to users comitee and make them negociate consensus between them on what should be done. they should know this early on so that they accept it.

## 7 LAND CENTERS

Walk on the land, feel it again and again. Map important centers (soil types, views, landforms topology, existing structures, plants, animal routes, climate, noise, …).

Choose the 7 major most natural centers to focus on.

## 8 CENTERS COMBINATIONS

Combine the two systems of centers: your pattern language and the land centers.

Use the the new centers brought by the pattern language to heal old/existing centers.

Use the 15 geometric properties as a guide to check afterwards if your potential actinos will make reinforce existing centers and the place more alive.

This is the most difficult part of the process and you'll need to use intuition and feeling rather and intellect and analysis

## 9 PROTOTYPES AND MOCKUPS

On the land try to make cheap/fast mockups and see if they work/help increase the degree of life. Use poles with flags to visualize the position of structure, use cardbaord, painting on small scale to visualize the effect of ornements, …

## 10 BUILD 

Remain open to change and opportunities that might come accross. Problems are solutions, ie, try to turn unexpected thing into usefull things.
craftmanship, have various people with crafts and talent build different parts, avoid the use of prefabricated structures that constraint the design


## EVOLUTION

## …



